To some degree, we are always gambling,
always taking risks in life. If you put
up $100 at the roulette table, you could
lose it all if things don't turn out in
your favor. But in real estate, people
tend to borrow from the bank. Using
leverage, either to their advantage or
because they don't have enough cash. But
what happens when those using that
leverage start to see their investment
turn south? You came here for the truth.
So let me unveil that for you. Today we
are going to look at one particular
topic and that is margin. Let's begin
here by talking about it and then I will
show you the statistics why it's
important. As the name implies,
securitiesbased loans rely on the value
of stocks, bonds or mutual funds as
collateral. The most common form of
securities based loan is a margin loan.
So imagine this ridiculous concept where
you can actually use stocks to buy more
stocks. And here this typically allows
you to borrow up to 50% of the value of
the stocks in your account and a higher
percentage of the less volatile assets
such as treasuries or municipal bonds.
So imagine that for a second. you don't
need to front all that money and you
could buy up twice as much stock as you
normally would be able
to. This has caused a boom in the stock
market to some degree. Whenever you see
a bull market, you always see an
increase in the amount of margin that
has been created. But it won't be a big
problem for everyone if there's not that
much margin happening right now. But
I'll show you that it is truly
unfortunate the situation we are in
today. So let's look at this
here. Margin debt climbed to a record
high in February. A fresh sign of the
bullishness for Flumxed investors trying
to navigate the political and economic
crosscurrens driving markets. There's
more in this article. Let me just
discuss this momentarily. What we have
here at the roulette table that I
discussed at the beginning is you in
most cases you want to bet $100 at the
roulette table. You have to have a $100
cash. You put that up. If you lose it,
you lost your $100. But what happens in
the event that you are buying a $1
million home and you put up
20%. So you don't have to necessarily
have 100% of that price of that home to
own 100%. You only need 20%, let's say.
And so you do that and it's a big big
amount of leverage but the bank will do
that because they can always take the
home as collateral. They can always take
it away from
you. What happens however if the market
starts to decline? Well then if you had
put in let's say
$200,000 and the housing prices went
from a million to $800,000.
Suddenly, you're completely out of cash.
And that's the way this works. Your
equity can evaporate very fast when
you're using leverage. That's the
problem. Now, in these typical margin
loans, I assure you, as soon as your
money starts to decline, you're going to
be getting a phone call saying, um,
you're going to have to put a little bit
more cash in there. But what if you
didn't? What if you just made that
assumption that stocks will always rise?
Well, then you'd be in a very big
problem. The amount investors borrowed
against their brokerage account climbed
to, can you believe this? $500 billion
in February according to the most recent
data available. And that's up from the
month prior.
Now before we get into the actual chart,
let's just cover one more part from
this. With margin debt, investors pledge
securities, typically stocks or bonds,
to obtain a loan from their brokerage
firm. And it essentially goes on to say
that they don't have to, but that's
usually what they do.
And this is to me frightening because
it's all fine and dandy when the
market's moving upward, but that's what
causes the problem when you see a market
taking a nose
dive. Every single time there's a
recession or depression, you always see
a nose dive. Things fall very, very
rapidly. And there's fear involved.
There's a lot of things that are
involved here, but ultimately the stock
market rises and even if it's rising at
a rather fast pace, it always seems to
drop at a much faster pace and then it
doesn't find that stability for a long
period of time. It will cause a lot of
pain to a lot of people who are using
margin. It's not as bad to those who
just fronted all the money in hopes that
it would rise. But those who are using
margin will be hurt tremendously by
this. I assure you. Now, let's look at
the situation that we face today. It
should be of no surprise to anyone that
this
continues to increase as time goes on.
We are seeing a state that we have seen
before. No doubt it rose and it came
down. It had risen and guess what? It
came down. Every time the same thing
occurs. And it actually is getting worse
as the years go on. Every time there is
a recession, these indicators that I've
shown you get worse. So you need to keep
an eye on this. Look at margin debt.
Remember that this is very important as
an indicator for the health of the stock
market. You also need to look into
things like PE ratios and other things
that I've discussed previously on this
ecourse as well as my books. But what
you need to know is that leverage is
very powerful. It makes people a lot of
money, but at the same time, it can make
people very poor very quickly. It's it's
dangerous. It's risky, but it's up to
you. That's all for this video. This is
part of the money GPS ecourse. It's a
free ecourse available on my website,
the
moneygps.com. So, check that out over
there. I have a lot of free information,
hours upon hours of free information
there in the free ecourse. If you click
on that button in the bottom left, I've
got free ebooks. I've got information on
there. All my YouTube videos are on
there. Everything else for you to check
out that is at the
moneygps.com. Take care.